The pair selection process for ETFs is quite easy: we need to find ETFs that are exposed to common economic
factors. Besides country ETFs, sector ETFs are another fertile ground for finding cointegrated instruments. 
For example, the retail fund RTH cointegrates with the consumer staples fund XLP.

Another favorite ETF pairing of mine is between a commodity ETF and an ETF of companies that produce that 
commodity. The gold fund GLD versus the gold miners fund GDX is a good example. The rationale is that since 
the main asset of a gold-mining company is gold, their values should cointegrate with gold spot prices.

What has oil price got to do with the cointegration between gold price and gold miners’ share prices? A lot, 
apparently. It turns out that when oil prices are expensive, it costs a lot more to mine gold, and therefore 
the profits of gold miners are reduced, leading to the underperformance of their share prices relative to gold
 spot prices (“The Wacky World of Gold,” 2011).
To gather empirical support for this explanation, we can introduce the oil fund USO into the portfolio and see 
if this triplet cointegrates over the entire period from 2006 to 2012. The Johansen test shows that they do,
with a 99 percent probability that there exists one cointegrating relationship. Hence, instead of just trading GLD
and GDX, we can trade this portfolio of triplets instead. Even if you find trading a triplet too cumbersome,
you should at least have a rule in place to cease trading GLD versus GDX whenever oil price exceeds a certain threshold.

When scientists fi rst come upon an unexplained phenomenon, they form a hunch about its cause, and then they find ways 
to test this hunch empirically. We should adopt the same scientific process in approaching trading. When a trading
strategy stops working, we should form a hypothesis of the reason, and then test empirically whether that hypothesis is 
supported by data. The outcome of this process is often a modified strategy that regains profitability.